This is Daryl Lane, Keith Johnson, and David Carson. This will be the second of
two shows on the subject of First Contact. You will remember from our last show
that a First Contact story is one in which humans and aliens meet for the first
time. Our treatment of the topic this time will emphasize movies dealing with
the First Contact theme.
The 40s and 50s would be a classic period for the Bug-Eyed Monster movie. Recall
some of the titles of those years. It Came From Outer Space, The Blob, Them. The
Thing. I remember a lot of those movies, too, particularly that Came From Outer
Space, were in 3D. And, of course, that was even more horrifying when your Bug
-Eyed Monster would be in three dimensions rather than two. And, of course,
everyone had to wear the glasses, the special 3D glasses, to appreciate the
effects. But, of course, those movies were almost all the same. They tried to
outdo each other in the weirdness of their Bug-Eyed Monsters, the hostility that
they would have toward humans. The destructive power that they each had. Today
it would seem a little ridiculous to us. Of course, there are some movies today,
which we can talk about a little bit later, which go back to that early trend of
the Bug-Eyed Monsters. I think one of the reasons for that might be the time
period in which they were made, being in the 40s and the 50s, the era of World
War II, shortly after World War II, entering into McCarthyism and the Cold War.
However, anything that wasn't one of us must be one of them and couldn't
possibly be friendly. And that probably led to a lot of the it
-came-from-outer-space type of movie. Of course, that has a long tradition
behind it, the monster. Back to the very beginnings of literature, human
literature, the Sumerian Epic of Gilgamesh, the Greek Epics of Homer, the
Cyclops, the one-eyed creatures, all the ancient heroes had to face some kind of
monster, some kind of alien creature. And you can trace that through all periods
of literary history, all cultures. And, of course, for science fiction, that was
perfect. They could pick up on that. They could have their bug-eyed monsters
arrive in space vehicles. They could do anything they wanted to in making them
weird. It was just another vehicle for the larger-than-life hero in the...
Right, a formula story. ...out-of-this-world monster. A formula story, exactly.
And, of course, all those bug-eyed monster movies would have a beautiful
heroine, of course, with not many clothes on. Of course, the monster usually
wanted her for some reason, and the hero had to rescue her. And it was a typical
formula story. One of the first breaks in those formula stories was Robert
Wise's The Day the Earth Stood Still. And this was made in 1951, and the premise
behind the story was an advanced being and his companion land on the Earth, make
initial contact with the Earthlings. And the Earthlings' first contact with them
is violent. They shoot him on the spot. And his message is that if the Earth
doesn't shape up and get their internal conflicts under control, they will not
be allowed to take them off planet.
And he is, in essence, a benevolent alien. And this was a new sort of trend for
science fiction movies. This hadn't really been expounded on before. Especially
at that time. That wasn't long after the Second World War. No, and it was right
there in the middle of the McCarthyism period. Right. You recall that story by
Leinster where he equates the aliens with the Japanese, you know, the vicious
enemy. To have a movie like this in the, what was it, 51, where the alien is
friendly and non-aggressive, and the humans he comes in contact with wish to
destroy him, that must have been a great change for theater goers to run across
that kind of science fiction movie. And it was extremely popular. Wasn't there a
robot in that movie? Wasn't his companion? You mentioned his companion. Wasn't
the companion a robot? Yes, in the movie Klaatu, the, quote, human alien had a
companion robot named Gort. Now, in the short story this was taken from Farewell
to the Master, it ends up that the master is really the robot and the companion
is the human. But this is never really brought out in the movie version of it.
And the movie is a sort of interplanetary policeman. Of course, in a way, the
Day the Earth Stood Still was tied to its time period. The war was over, and
treaties had been signed, and this might have been a way of expressing sort of
the brotherhood of man, the fact that we'd gone through a huge war. We killed
other human beings, other living creatures. And the movie did not, I don't think
it presented humans in a very fine way. We could see ourselves as war makers, as
aggressors, as having gone through a terrible war. Perhaps that movie had a
message to it, making us see ourselves as a good creature. I believe it did. It
used a common formula for movies of that time, in which the military were the
war makers, and the scientists were sort of the intellectual, far-seeing
peacemakers. And that was brought out at the end of the movie, where the
collection of scientists gathered, and they wanted to speak with Klaatu and the
military. We're saying, well, no, this is now dangerous. That's now a military
operation. And then Klaatu comes out and gives his final and rather famous
speech, and then they depart. Another movie which treated the aliens more
sensitively, I think, was also in the 50s, 1955, This Island, Earth. Yeah, This
Island, Earth, the crux of that story was there was a planet far distant part of
our galaxy, which was at war with a totally alien race, and they had come to
Earth to use some of the Earth people's technology, plus their expertise and
just the manpower, to build some more weapons and then transport them back to
Metaluna, which was the planet which they came from. They were a highly
intelligent race, which used several subsystems of the race on their planet, one
of them being a rather insect-like monster, which provided one of the more
harrowing moments in the movie where the monster gets loose on board the ship
and chases, of course, chases the heroine around the ship before it's eventually
destroyed.
It treated the aliens as a benevolent creature. In the end, the alien who
transported them to Metaluna takes them back to Earth and leaves them there.
Before his ship eventually runs out of fuel and burns up in the atmosphere. But
at the same time, even in the 50s, you would have... In fact, you always have
this, a return to the bug-eyed monster motif. The first version of the Invasion
of the Body Snatchers was in 1956. Of course, we've had another version
recently. Yes, it was remade in 79. But that is totally a scare movie. Not only
are you meeting aliens, but their particular form... In fact, they're not
intelligent aliens, if I recall correctly. They simply take over the host body
and inhabit it. They take over the host body and they overlay the host with
their own emotions. Their... Their own motivations. Well, really their own
motivations. They're not really very emotional creatures. They're very
unemotional. Very logical. You don't get a very good grasp of what the aliens
are like at all. The aliens are a spore-like creature, which is parasitic. And
it literally reconstructs a new human from the original human's tissue and
finally absorbs it into its own system and kills the original human. And the
duplicate human comes to life with all the memories of the original human, but
in sort of a new order, new pattern. And of course, they are here to conquer.
They are here to take over the Earth. Even if it isn't an intelligent conflict,
why that is the kind of thing that they are built to do. This is taken from an
old theory by Arrhenius that life on Earth started from spores, which migrated
through space on the wings of the solar wind, perhaps, landed on Earth and then
began life here. It's an interesting theory. Discredited, but still interesting.
Well, the second version of the movie, the recent one, I think it's two years
old or so, the beginning of that, I think, in a lot of ways, the earlier version
was the better, the classic. But the beginning of the second one, it was well
done, showing the spores traveling through space, arriving on Earth and becoming
part of our ecology, and eventually taking over human bodies. But that's a true
horror movie. You know, not only are we up against aliens, but when you think of
some non-human creature taking over your body or destroying your existence, but
using your physical structure where you have no control, you can see where
people would be horrified at such a thing. In most first-context stories, at
least you have some kind of alien with a personality, hostile or non-hostile,
you can talk with them. But here, you haven't got anything you can really talk
to or argue with. No, the aliens are really humans who have changed their mind.
That's really the only way you could look at them in the movie. It's an alien
being in the movie was somebody who you once knew, but suddenly their system of
values and what they held dear to them, they have just simply changed their mind
and become a different person. 2001, I think, could be called, a first contact
movie. It's a very different type. Again, you have no aliens in it. But it is an
excellent first contact. Of course, based on Clarke's short story, "The Sentinel",
and along with Kubrick, he collaborated on the movie. And it probably is... Most
people consider it to be the best science fiction movie ever made. Obviously a
matter of opinion.
But, of course, similar also to his book, Childhood's End, in which the alien,
even though we never meet the aliens and don't know much about them, they are
clearly superior to human beings. In fact, they have come in and taken a guiding
hand in the development of the human species. Yes. They have actually... Yes.
They were actually... You get the impression at the first of the movie that they
had been responsible for evolution. Yes. Taking an ape-like or man-like creature
who was still seemingly an ape and guiding it along evolutionary paths until
they reach the point they can travel to the moon and find the next signal in the
terms of this huge monolith. And it emitted some signal, some frequency, that
they could follow. And they sent, of course, their huge ship following that
signal with Hal, a computer, in control of it. And at the end of the movie, of
course, the star child... Very ambiguous ending, but still at the same time it
was optimistic. You get the idea of a new stage in human evolution, just as the
ape-like creatures had become men at the beginning because of the alien's help,
that humans in the movie were ready to move on to some further stage in
evolution, some higher level because of the help of the aliens. And I think this
is about the only way that you can depict an alien who is very far above you.
You can't really... We can't do it because we're limited in our human
imaginations. And you almost have to depict him sort of offstage meddling in
human affairs. And many times in the movies they have to depict him offstage
because special effects couldn't accommodate him. That's true, too. Well, with
that particular movie, of course, there was no problem with the special effects
on the alien. All they had to do was to conceive of this monolithic signal. This
monolith, I guess, is what you call it. Some sort of transponder. You never
really were given a concrete definition as to what it was other than it was
something that signaled or brought about a jump in man's intellect or his
reasoning. It's interesting to read the story, "The Sentinel", from which the
movie came. There's a very great difference. In the story, an expedition to the
moon comes upon a monolith. It's on the surface, by the way. In the movie, it
was buried. They had to dig it out. But in the story, it was on the surface,
and, of course, it stuck out to such an extent that the humans couldn't miss it.
And they go up and they study it. They realize it's the product of a far
superior culture. They also can calculate that it's been millions of years since
the monolith was set up on the moon. They don't know what the purpose of it is.
But, of course, the point of the story is wondering, you know, who were they?
When did they come? Why did they come? Where are they now? And Clarke leads us to
believe at the end of it that the aliens, whomever they were, set this up on the
moon to signal them as to when the humans had reached a sufficient point in
technology that they could reach the moon from Earth. And, of course, the movie
created one of the greatest or most memorable characters, if you can call him
that, in the science fiction environment. And that, of course, is Hal, the
computer. That was well done, I thought. He becomes a character in his own
right.
Consider the television audience. You have to have something that's familiar.
You have to have something that's sharp. If you had a show which showed aliens
as benevolent or dealt with any kinds of deep questions regarding first contact,
I don't think it would work. You have to go back to the bug-eyed monster, the
menace, something that people can feel quickly and understand quickly. You can't
get as much depth in a movie as you can in a book, and you can get even less
depth in a TV show. You have to stick to action. Even Star Trek, for example,
although it did look at a lot of different interesting themes and work on some
controversial subjects, was essentially, as Roddenberry admitted, a wagon train
to the stars. It was an adventure series. There were a number of Star Trek
episodes which dealt with first contact. One of them, I think, based on a
Frederick Brown short story, Arena. Yes. Yeah, that one being where the
Enterprise encountered an aggressive alien force on one of our Federation
planets and drove them off-planet and then continued to pursuing them across the
galaxy and were stopped by an extremely vastly superior race, and one person
from each crew on each ship was taken down to fight in this arena on this world,
one being the Gorn, a lizard-like creature, and the other being Captain Kirk,
and they eventually had a rather long and arduous battle of which Kirk was
eventually victorious. He decided not to kill the Gorn, which proved our
superiority and our humanity over the Gorn race, and we were spared
annihilation because the superior race which was hosting this battle had decided
to kill the victor because they would be the most dangerous, but instead they
had spared both the Gorn and the human race and allowed them to live on. That's
almost an obvious way of treating the first contact material in that here you
have an alien who looks like a reptile, who is a reptile, you have a human
being, and they are going at one-on-one combat with the loser, you know, to lose
everything his ship, his crew, and so forth. That isn't a motif in many ancient
literatures, in fact, in the Greek epics, in the Iliad, the prototype of war
stories. Various times in the battle, one of the Greek warriors, one of the
Trojan warriors, would step out into an arena, the battlefield, everybody else
would gather around, and they would go at it one-on-one, the rules being the
winner would take all, the loser would, of course, lose all. That seems to be
fairly common in a lot of cultures. That was fairly common in the Indian
cultures in the northern United States and down in New Mexico and South America.
It's also fairly common in African cultures, so this seems to be a world...
Easily translatable into the alien, alien first contact material. Very dramatic,
very visual, and I thought that was one of their better episodes. That's one
thing television can do. It does have limitations, but it's very dramatic, it's
very visual, it's very immediate, and to have that kind of contact. Of course,
with the message at the end of it, you know, when the human did not kill the
alien, you know, the idea that non-aggression got him something. A couple of
times, Star Trek did manage to bring across a first contact story that was not
immediate action-oriented. The story of the Horta, of course, is one of their
best ones. An alien being was apparently killing off a colony on some planet,
and it turned out that this alien being was the last survivor of an almost dead
race who was protecting her young. They didn't recognize, the humans did not
recognize this, because the young and the alien herself looked like pieces of
rock, pieces of mineral, but it turned out that she was merely exhibiting mother
love, and this is kind of a difficult thing to portray on television, and I
think it was to Star Trek's credit they were able to bring it off successfully.
I think one of the best things television has done, as long as we're talking
about television in regard to first contact stories, is one that I don't often
think of as first contact, but I believe it should be considered as such, and
that would be Ray Bradbury's Martian Chronicles. I think of all the first
contact works I can think of, perhaps this better than any other, illustrates
the learning of something about ourselves, a reflection of our own culture
because of the contact. Of course, all we do, you know, we go to Mars, and
contact the remnants of a much, much older Martian culture, and because of that
contact, we see ourselves as hostile, as aggressive. Of course, this is a series
of short stories, you know, over a period of time. We see ourselves as
materialistic, you know, all of the bad qualities which the human race does
have, and of course, finally, the humans that are on Mars are locked there
because of the fact Earth destroys itself, which they can tell, but I believe
that was a three-part episode on television. I think one of the better things
they've done on television, but it was excellent first contact material. Yes,
the switching from television to movies, the movies have recently had two
very different first contact. extremes, almost. Extremes in the thematic
approach. The first one we'll talk about is Alien, a movie directed by Ridley
Scott and written by Dan O'Bannon and others. It is essentially a something-goes
-bump-in-the-night horror movie in that the Earthlings are traveling along in a
gigantic mining ship and they're awakened by their computers and told that some
sort of signal has been picked up emanating from this planet and they go down to
investigate and a rather gruesome, very non-benevolent alien is brought on board
and the alien systematically starts dispatching the crew and also using the crew
as a part of its reproductive cycle. It implants egg inside them and the egg
eventually forms a pod and the pod sits around waiting for some other life form
to come by and when the other life form comes by it implants itself inside it
and then furthers implants an egg inside that life form in this case being a
human life form and the egg matures further and then uses the life form as food
and then breaks out of them and then grows into the adult alien which goes
around searching for more life forms to implant eggs and so on and so on. The
thing about this movie which brought it out of the mediocre was its stunning
visuals. It was beautifully photographed and the creature that they devised in
this is probably one of the best monsters ever created for the screen. But on
the other hand it's still it's still a bug-eyed monster. Very true. The movie
you're right the movie was a fine movie and it was saved by the technology the
visual effects but as some critics remarked and with I totally agree with this
it was really a Jaws set in outer space. Yes. Very true. It was a cross between
Jaws and Star Wars. But still I would say as you mentioned earlier it was an
extreme I mean there are extremes in the treatment of aliens in the movies today
and that of course would be the extreme that goes back to the bug-eyed monster
days. And one of the more optimistic movies that has to deal with first contact
is of course Close Encounters of the Third Kind.
That being a movie by Steven Spielberg written by Steven Spielberg and directed by him
also. I think that probably would be considered the classic first encounter
movie in Hollywood history. It incorporates a lot of the elements of first
contact that UFO specialists and others interested in first contact on a real
basis have been talking about for a number of years. Yes. It was obviously
crafted with a lot of love and attention to detail
and it seems to me to be a very passionate work in that he obviously wanted to
portray and show something that he held very close to himself. Well consider
what it would be like. To me the movie more than anything else the details of it
the plot structure all of this was subservient to one thing and that was the
feeling. What's it going to be like when we actually and truly make first
contact with an alien culture? What are we going to feel like? Now of course one
way that the early movies treated that was well they're going to be monsters
they're going to be hostile we can't show them where we live if it happens off
the earth. But this movie at the end of it in particular you got a sense of
wonder sense of fascination sense of awe that we have contacted an alien culture
they are not hostile what's it going to mean? It's an opportunity for us rather
than something we should be afraid of. Yes it's an extremely optimistic ending
to the movie. And of course the communication in the movie was if you can call
it that I suppose was sonics or sound or tonal qualities rather than any kind of
language or... Yeah they communicated with sound and light
and the movie is actually done on two levels, one with the electrical technician
working for the power company who had an encounter with an alien craft which
transferred this image of where they were going to land to him and on the second
level it was an international organization which was tracking down possible
landing sites and using extreme advanced technology, was determining where they
were going to land, when they were going to land, they had this all figured out in
advance and when they finally our hero convert finally gets to the area where
the craft is going to land, all these other people from all over the world have
also converged on this one spot because they have also had sightings and they
have also had this thought implanted in them that something is going to happen
here of extreme importance, so they've all going there to find out what it is, and
once first contact is made and the aliens are actually seen and our people go on
board to a journey with them on through space. The movie ends on just a very very
high note very very high optimism. I think that scene where the the principal
alien ship lands and the the people have prepared for them with the sound and
the lights and the interchange the sound, at first very tentative sort of sort of
timid, and finally it works up to a huge crescendo. And the looks on the
faces of the humans as they realize what they've done. Here is just to me is one
of the most beautiful things done in science fiction movies. Even the military
personnel and you traditionally in the movies see the military as a fairly hard
people and not willing to go along with this kind of viewpoint but everybody
there is staring up at the mothership in awe and wonder it's quite a great
feeling. I can't think of a movie that would be more more extreme from Alien than
this one. it's almost totally different at the other end of the spectrum you know
the aliens are non-aggressive they are friendly they are superior but they do
seem to be benevolent too.
This is Daryl Lane Keith Johnson and David Carson.